well move over chief health officers and
surgeon generals there is a new cop on
the beat
the planetary health authority
no this is not a new star trek character
this is a real position a planetary
health authority
now before you think well that's just a
fancy name for a geologist or maybe a
climate change tsar
isn't it amazing how modern democratic
institutions are not shy about using
terms like tsar to label their officials
it's very strange isn't it no the
planetary health authority is a medical
doctor this has taken the guya
hypothesis to new heights what does one
study exactly in planetary medical
school are there classes on iron core
physiology how to take lava samples to
be sent to solar system pathology what
exactly should one prescribe for an
earthquake and if it's above magnitude 6
are there specialists that planets
suffering from ill health can be
referred to as i sat down today to
continue reading research and writing on
the next top cast episode about the
physics of heat and work i saw a hashtag
trending on twitter it was hashtag
endangered gen and i thought for a
moment that while there can be more put
into publicizing the sacrifices of
veterans from world war ii for example
on social media that describing them as
an endangered generation was possibly
lacking a little insensitivity but no i
was wrong the hashtag was not for
recognising the declining population of
heroic survivors of those freedom
fighters who stood against
authoritarianism but rather about the
youngest people of all
the world has never been more wealthy
more healthy and more safe for a
youngster and globally life expectancy
continues to rise and yet the youngsters
are now being told
they are endangered who would promote
such a message
well the first three tweets i could find
about this hashtag all came from the
same source
melbourne australia's monash university
in some polls monash is ranked at the
very top of australian universities so
quite the backing of a certain idea like
this
but the official account of monash
university the official twitter account
was linking to a piece in the newspaper
which is the guardian so well here we
have a respected institution of tertiary
learning linking to a respected or at
least a well-known newspaper article now
the tweet is in my substance article
itself but for listeners let me just
read out the tweet for you from monash
university and it says
climate change is just one of the big
challenges
future generations will grapple with
so how can we hashtag change it
experts weigh in on what the future will
really be like for the generations to
come hashtag endangered gen and then we
have a link to an article in the
guardian
and what from what we can see of the
preview of the article it says wake up
call are we really endangering the next
generation the world has changed but is
it irrevocable experts weigh in on what
the future will really be like for the
generations to come
well then
if as the tweet is saying experts weigh
in on this
endangered gen and the guardian has
something to say about it let's take a
look again the article itself that i'm
talking about is linked to in my
substance article but just in case
anything should happen to that article
i've also put screenshots of it on the
substack article as well and i'm going
to read just parts of the article and at
the very beginning we can see in this
article it's titled wake up call are we
really endangering the next generation
and then it begins by saying
in the 1950s industry and development
catalysed the so-called great
acceleration
a dramatic surge in human consumption
and activity that continues to this day
four generations have contributed to
upward trends in population wealth
movement energy use telecommunications
and production with global impact within
only the past decade we have seen
catastrophic weather events treatment
resistant disease and socio-political
unrest climate change looms large in our
collective consciousness but it is only
one threat and it goes on
anyway to the left of this article in
fine print it says
paid for by monash university
so
it's an advertisement
paid for by monash university now that's
curious and quite some hutzpah construct
a marketing tweet but link to what seems
to be an article in the guardian but
actually it's just your own
advertisement and it is these people the
universities and the mainstream media
that apparently are all about
misinformation and disinformation so
we're told could you imagine the uproar
if it was not monash university but
instead
bp british petroleum and the tweet was
not about how endangered the next
generation was but rather about how
wealthy and healthy and safe from a
hostile environment the next generation
was all because of fossil fuels and now
imagine that the tweet linked to a web
address that was the new york post or in
australia the daily telegraph or the
spectator
giving the impression that it was a news
article but there in the fine print was
the admission that it was a paid
advertisement the tweet would not only
be deleted the accounts of both bp and
the offending media outlet would be
indefinitely suspended the new although
now defunct u.s disinformation board
would be top of the agenda once again on
all the mainstream media outlets and the
singing tick tocker who was to head the
operation offered a healthy dose of
smelling salts to reinvigorate her so as
to come down heavily on the kind of
propaganda that endangers the ability of
the citizen to navigate the mire of
misinformation online that we're told
we're always swimming in but never mind
all that because nothing that monash
university is saying in their article i
mean advertisement counts as
misinformation or disinformation in this
age of information and pessimism the
late 90s and 2000s ushered in what was
described as an information age but that
was to label literal information the
modern information age is correct
information it's approved information
and how is information approved as
information rather than its evil
loki-like twins miss and disinformation
well it's approved as such by
authorities we need authorities to be
able to certify information as reliable
trustworthy and accurate how else could
it possibly work such authorities will
be of course in the main university
academics that goes without saying
the most highly credentialed experts in
their field the ones who are able to
predict the future by looking into their
crystal balls sorry i mean modeling
complex systems with their super
computers it's not important that you
understand how it's done you should
trust the experts when they say it can
be done after all trust the experts is a
heuristic you have been inculturated
with at school and also by the media and
well an expert is just a certain kind of
authority anyways an elected official a
politician well that's basically just
someone who listens to the experts and
acts on expert advice to do otherwise
well that would be irrational and of
course that does raise the question as
to why there is any need for these
elected class of politicians at all
anyway
surely it would be far more streamlined
if we just let the experts decide
without any of this friction of having a
parliament they would not have to
explain and presumably dumb down their
carefully crafted and technical
scientific theories and predictions for
a group of people who are largely only
expert in things like law and political
science and business in some cases
unionism more often and community
organisation and education but for now
we seem to be stuck with this pesky
democracy thing and so the best we can
do is vote in people who before they're
elected profess their agreement with
expert opinion especially on the most
important problems like the science of
catastrophic climate change and it is
indeed said to be a catastrophe whether
the catastrophe is already upon us or
whether it is about to begin and is
right around the corner we don't know it
depends on what the weather's doing at
any one particular moment the
catastrophic climate change headline
doesn't usually go into details although
if there's just been a flood well that's
evidence of catastrophic climate change
of course if the weather is good for a
long period of time well well of course
then we know that weather isn't climate
but the important thing is to keep
repeating the mantra that it is a
catastrophe and so one is entitled to
catastrophize and catastrophize to a
degree and into a level of detail that
would make the dominionist religious
fanatic blush with their tall tales of
end times fire and brimstone literally
falling from the heavens as the day of
judgment is upon us
but this is not that don't compare some
silly ludicrous religious myth with the
science there's a very good reason why
one set of prophecies i mean predictions
are challenged by respected media
outlets they're journalists and
reporters while others are not there's a
difference between the science and silly
doomsday end time scenarios that'd be
ridiculous but haven't the experts made
precise and detailed predictions over
the decades and been proven false no
you've obviously not been paying
attention you must not understand the
science and how modelling works there's
room for error the central theory is
correct and each year as our computer
models become more precise we can refine
our predictions and see why we made some
errors over the last few decades those
people didn't really know what they're
doing but now we have much better
technology and far more refined theories
in other words each time one set of
predictions from those who insist the
world is going to be destroyed by
climate change in short order just you
wait just you wait each time those
predictions prove false or the time
comes and goes when the famine should
have killed millions or the rising sea
level should have wiped out entire
cities or in the case here in australia
of our australian experts the drought
should have seen all the major dams
around sydney run dry decades ago and
four decades instead there's been record
floods for years now each time those
predictions turn out false there is no
need whatsoever to revise anything of
the underlying theory and doctrine the
theory is sound and as such precise
predictions about disaster are
scientific as well so it is entirely
right and reasonable to double down in
these cases
respectable academics and journalists
who report their musings should in these
cases argue it's even worse than we
thought so perhaps there was no drought
you need to say something like well i
don't think that's what dr flannery our
respected australian academic who talks
about climate change was really saying
in context if if you go back and listen
to his remarks
that could be a good way of getting
around this but you need to emphasize
the floods that we've just seen even if
the droughts never happened the floods
are a result of climate change and mean
we really do need to begin taxing the
big polluters more so they pay their
fair share okay
so there was no famine but it's coming
and it's going to be even worse than
what the people in the past said it
might become no place has yet been
inundated by rising sea levels and no
population is displaced by the melting
of the polar ice caps but just you wait
it's going to be far worse and faster
than any of us can imagine this is
generation endangered and by the way now
and again peppy your remarks with it's
probably too late to do anything to save
you your friends in the world but maybe
if there are some few survivors of the
inevitable apocalypse to come and you'd
like to have the best chance of being
among those few survivors there are some
rituals that might appease the gods i
mean authorities convert to veganism
firstly because farming causes methane
and didn't you know methane is even
worse than carbon dioxide for global
warming and on carbon dioxide vote for
policies that eliminate fossil fuels
the wealthy cause more pollution and
destruction than anyone else so vote for
redistribution where you can and perhaps
for governments more closely in touch
with cultures that themselves have a
deep understanding of land and the place
of people in a natural environment
wealth is a very suspicious thing the
pursuit of profit is absolutely a sin
and powered by fossil fuel burning
carbon dioxide generating and it's all
dirty energy anyway and what do we do
with sinners the people pursuing profits
well we can leave that to the
authorities as well but we know which
way we're voting just maybe even if we
cannot save ourselves at least those who
have brought the great evil and the
anger of the earth upon us maybe they'll
finally get their just desserts in such
a world where people are astonishingly
still allowed to freely choose more or
less how to live in western countries
people are still choosing the wrong
thing they're still choosing not what is
right for the planet people are still
eating meat they're still driving cars
with combustion engines people are still
voting for parties that say things like
we can't get to net zero emissions by
2030. this is the world of so-called
freedom and such a world of so-called
freedom is just the freedom to commit
suicide and murder everyone else around
you such a disastrous disconnect between
what we know for certain about what
these science is telling us will happen
and what people are allowed to choose is
everything that is wrong with the world
covert taught us something it taught us
that if the crisis comes then we can act
rationally we can stop this ridiculous
idea that non-experts are in any
position to decide what is best for the
safety of people in the environment for
once the officials or the authorities or
the experts with actual relevant
credentials and political perspectives
and medical degrees for once they were
front and center and able to keep us
safe and healthy for once finally and
those who disagreed were put in their
rightful place kept at home off the
streets and of course
silence as far as possible to help stop
the spread of their miss and
disinformation if there's one thing
worse than the spread of a respiratory
virus it's the spread of misinformation
and in both cases there needs to be a
way to inoculate people against it the
chief health officer knows what is best
they understand more than others what it
takes for individuals and communities to
be healthy it's there in their title the
chief of the health officers they are
concerned primarily with health and if
they say close the gyms and restrict
shopping hours is best for your health
then that's what is best for your health
and anyone who disagrees is obviously
wrong now that's all very well for a
pandemic but what about when the
pandemic is over how can we ensure that
people with actual knowledge and
understanding of the science
can still have authority well what about
a planetary health officer
i'm going to unpack the guardian's
article i mean monash university's
advertisement a paragraph at a time
because it's worth understanding all of
this this is a mixture not merely of
science and non-science but science and
nonsense
and how a world view really does shape
and how one interprets facts and i know
that what i've just said previously
might be a bit hard to pass was i being
serious or not serious well hopefully my
perspective becomes more clear if you
don't know me very well you should know
what my perspective is anyway but as i
begin to unpack this article i'm going
to read through it um i'm going to read
a few paragraphs anyway from this this
remarkable article slash advertisement
from monash university and maybe you'll
see what my perspective is
so the article begins as i said um well
in this way let me just read the whole
thing about the first paragraph anyway
quote
the world has changed but is it
irrevocable experts weigh in on what the
future will really be like for the
generations to come
in the 1950s industry and development
catalysed the so-called great
acceleration a dramatic surge in human
consumption and activity that continues
to this day
four generations have contributed to
upward trends in population wealth
movement energy use telecommunications
and production with global impact end
quote so fans of lord of the rings
movies will know that the world is
changed is exactly how the series began
with galadriel making those remarks
it is nothing but a vacuous truism
it is everything that is wrong not with
climate science or even concerns about
climate change but rather with the
political ideology that is behind so
much of what is said about climate
science and climate change clearly there
is only one constant in our universe and
with the climate in particular and that
is that over long time scales it changes
with or without people it changes with
people and with or without the burning
of fossil fuels the climate would change
in another branch of the multiverse in
another world in other words where for
whatever reason human beings discovered
nuclear physics far sooner and all of
our electricity is now generated either
by fission or fusion and it has preceded
for centuries without major accident
there would still be climate change the
earth eventually would either cool or
heat up because that's what happens and
then we would still need to do something
as we do now whether that something is
terraformed to heat or cool the earth in
some way so as to make it more
hospitable for us may be an open
question but this is what we should want
to do to change the climate in response
to natural and or man-made climate
change
we change the climate in our houses and
cars so why not the planet we neither
want sea levels to rise or fall perhaps
in some places like greenland and russia
it would be better if the climate
changes such that it was warmer it would
be good if we could do that maybe the
middle east and parts of africa and the
centre of australia could do with some
cooling it would be good if we could do
that too simultaneously maybe one day we
will whatever the case the world has
changed is no great insight but this is
what a centre of higher learning is
offering first up to entice us to attend
deep stuff now as for the rest of that
paragraph if you have been indoctrinated
into anti-human pessimism then you will
read that sentence that labels the great
acceleration a period of dramatic surges
in population wealth movement energy use
telecommunications and production as
nothing but a great evil it portends
disaster to you but for an optimist this
is amazing this is an amazing list of
wonderful things and these are some of
the indicators of why things have indeed
gotten better and they have gotten
better the paragraph asks is it
irrevocable and that might as well be
applied in retrospect to the question of
our improvement the improvements morally
scientifically technologically the
improvements for ourselves and the
planet the planet used to be a death
trap everywhere and almost all the time
for everyone
now civilization makes it inhabitable
and in a few still delicate admittedly
in the cosmic scheme of things in a few
places there are signs of resilience
structures where people and their
animals are protected all right let's
read another paragraph the next one
quote
within only the past decade we have seen
catastrophic weather events
treatment-resistant disease and
socio-political unrest climate change
looms large in our collective
consciousness but it is only one threat
facing coming generations as we enter
the next decade is there still time for
us to take action or are our children
and their children really endangered end
quote sounds scary but in other words
every decade there are catastrophic
weather events treatment resistant
diseases and socio-political unrest how
has it ever been otherwise when has it
ever been otherwise well actually it is
a little bit different now all of those
things cause less damage than they ever
have before because of us a reasonably
mild winter in europe in the past would
wipe out large percentages of the entire
population now we've got heated indoors
heated with our electricity much of it
generated by fossil fuels
treatment-resistant disease well at
least now we have treatments at all does
anyone really think medicine and
virology and treatments are in decline
or there was some time in the past where
there was more of a golden age than
there is now
socio-political unrest we've just exited
a century where the globe went to war
with itself twice and before that
history is a catalogue of nation against
nation and tribe against tribe almost
continuously
this last decade has been
safer
healthier more peaceful and more happy
than any before
are our children really more endangered
no
less than ever before and some reasons
for that include the burning of fossil
fuels which have accelerated the
construction of our built environment
more cheaply so that our capacity to
travel and share ideas and products more
than ever before and the powering of a
knowledge economy means that those
children are all at less risk of disease
than ever before in a society where war
and revolution though always a threat
have diminished to the point of being
morally unacceptable to most people
happily and that increasing majority of
people understand history to some extent
and how bad it was because we know
unlike our ancestors did just how bad it
can get it is not unthinkable that
nuclear war could still happen and it is
not impossible that democracies could be
overthrown by tyrannies but so many more
of us at least have netflix and youtube
honestly where we can actually see what
happened during world wars and in
nuclear conflict and what violent
revolutions can do
we're more educated we know more stuff
than ever before we learn we improve
things are getting better but things can
never be perfect or unproblematic the
article continues quote professor tony
capon is a leading authority in the
emerging field of planetary health and
directs the monash sustainable
development institute he says the major
challenges before us are global and
intersecting and will affect our
physical and mental well-being end quote
and that all sounds very nice unless
you're like me and you read it as one of
the more dystopian paragraphs in the
entire advertisement
a leading authority in planetary health
i guess professor tony capon is a very
nice guy i don't know him but this
insistence on the word authority is
always and everywhere to be regarded
with deep skepticism i've got two
reasons for this
number one the epistemological reason to
be skeptical about the use of the word
authority when authority is used as a
sort of synonym for expert in other
words to label someone as being in
possession of knowledge
allowing them the expertise or the
authority to claim to know or more
precisely to be deferred to on a
particular matter we are in a world of
plato's justified true belief
the only reason to regard someone or
other as an authority when it comes to
science or knowledge claims more broadly
like he's an authority on 17th century
french poetry for example it's because
someone somewhere is seeking to justify
that this person's claims are either
true or more true or more reliable than
the claims of someone else with less
authority but that entire way of
thinking is completely misleading it is
misleading because none of that
knowledge they have obtained over how so
ever many years prevents them from
making errors or even of making just as
many errors as anyone else especially in
places where there are significant
unknowns as karl popper remarked quote
while differing widely in the various
bits we know
in our infinite ignorance we are all
equal end quote
so even experts are infinitely ignorant
about infinitely many things we all are
they do not have authority over
knowledge nor are they authorities in
knowledge it's the wrong standard
as popper also wrote in 1960 in his
piece titled knowledge without authority
quote
i wish to replace the question of the
sources of our knowledge by the entirely
different question
how can we come to detect and eliminate
error end quote
that is what expertise is about it is
about a methodology more than any
quantity of knowledge does one
understand the methodology used in that
field of expertise to allow error to be
detected and eliminated
papa wanted to remove authority from the
entire conception we have of knowledge
because there are no infallible sources
so there should be no knowledge
authorities because we can all make
mistakes we are all error prone we are
all fallible so that's the reason
epistemologically speaking the places
like universities in particular should
very much avoid the use of this idea of
an authority in some particular area but
there's another reason
number two the moral reason to avoid
this word authority increasingly there
are experts who claim authority in both
the sense of already mentioned the
epistemological sense but also in the
political sense they regard their
expertise as a claim of literal
authority over their fellow citizens
never did we see more of this more
starkly than with public health experts
over the last few years
there quite often in many democracies
they were literal authorities designated
by the state as something in between an
elected official and a law enforcement
officer they were able to regulate on a
whim and although technically speaking
could be overruled by the politician
the culture itself rapidly descended
into one where the media and even the
people themselves an overwhelming
majority of people wanted the politician
to grant additional powers and
authorities to the health bureaucrats
because they knew best because it was
the science so that was the theory
put aside that there were many unknowns
the health authorities knew what to do
so it was argued in a culture where
individual freedom was already under
threat the very words individual and
freedom became throughout covert
pejoratives pejoratives labeling people
who wanted to kill grandma or people who
just did not care or my favorite of all
of these it was a label for lunatic
libertarians never mind that none of
these so-called lunatics ever said they
intended to break down the door of
vulnerable grandma the lunatics just
wanted to be able to do what they judged
in a world of unknowns
what they judged might make them via
their own immune systems more resilient
you know going outside into the fresh
air where there was already said to be
no transmission outside compared to
inside and also into the sunshine for
extended periods of time which was said
to be hostile to the virus and improved
vitamin d production which apparently
had something to do with
less likelihood of being infected by the
virus and perhaps even go to the gym
where they could lift some weights which
never before had been said to be
unhealthy rather the opposite but no
none of this was permitted because if
one group of us was to suffer the
consequences of an erroneous theory like
say stay inside out of the sun and on
the couch with delivered food then all
of us must suffer in exactly the same
way by making exactly the same decision
there can be no control group control
groups are immoral we have the authority
and we are the planetary health
authorities but i get ahead of myself so
i think we have two reasons for
universities in particular to avoid this
whole concept of their academics being
authorities on knowledge they can have
all the experts they want
but i don't think the word authority is
right and it conjures
some very bad ideas but anyway monash's
monash university's so-called planetary
health authority
seems to only be on authority in the
first sense but does anyone think there
are not those who pine for a global
planetary health authority office
staffed by planetary health officials
and headed by a chief planetary health
officer now the first one of these i've
encountered professor tony capon as we
say here from monash university says
that these challenges to planetary
health will affect not only your
physical but also your mental well-being
now that's fortunate because mental
well-being is so elastic a concept as to
include any new deviation from what is
said to be normal by
mental health experts it could very well
be the case that subscribing to the
wrong ideas could be a sign of poor
mental health and some remedy would need
to be undertaken to fix that
now let's go on to the next paragraph
quote
humans are now changing earth systems to
such an extent that it will affect the
wellbeing and lives of people into the
future
climate change is arguably the biggest
challenge
but others include clearing a forest for
agricultural production loss of
biodiversity and habitat has been part
of the rise in spillover of new
pathogens from animals to people as
we've seen with sars curvy ii end quote
yes so so let me repeat that first
sentence
the first sentence read quote
humans are now changing earth systems to
such an extent that it will affect the
well-being and lives of people into the
future end quote they forgot to put
something at the end there and that's
something they forgot to put was for the
better
humans are changing earth systems for
the better affecting well-being and
lives of people into the future for the
better for the better
and ever since we first evolved we've
done this first slowly or next to not at
all but since the enlightenment we have
changed earth systems
so called for the better and for the
better ever faster every single year
things will happen in the natural
environment absent us there will or
would be catastrophes like wildfires and
floods that cause loss of biodiversity
but the thing is if you care about this
biodiversity thing then the only thing
that can do anything to maintain it in
some way that people want is people
life evolves and ecosystems evolve
because the environment changes
there have been mass extinctions and
minor extinctions and the overwhelming
majority of them happened before people
ever existed and they're still happening
with or without people but apparently
now that we exist and we understand
something of what's going on every
single extinction or loss of
biodiversity because it occurs with us
on the planet must be because of us on
the planet but there is no reason to
think that that's true sure in some
cases it might be the case but but panda
bears can be helped by us to reproduce
and save their own species and yet they
don't
but this anti-humanism pessimism blames
us for everything that goes wrong for
literally everything that happens in the
earth major weather event human caused
climate change loss of some species
humans at the root of that somewhere new
pathogen resistant to treatments humans
using the one thing that keeps those
pathogens at bay antibiotics so now
there's an anti-antibiotic movement by
the way problems are soluble is not a
tenant in the belief system of adherence
to anti-human pessimism
next paragraph quote as a medical doctor
kapon refers to these aspects as
symptoms of the anthropocene
a term some researchers use to describe
this era of human influenced impact
they are signs that our ways of living
are out of balance with natural systems
end quote so now we are medicalising the
globe the patient is the planet and we
are going to need gps general planetists
as well as specialists to ensure we are
living in balance
what is this about being out of balance
is this medicine this sounds very
woo-woo it sounds like alternative
health more than actual medicine maybe
we'll have planetary medical science and
also alternative planetary medicine
an entire industry of homeopathic
remedies that national governments can
sign up for to recalibrate waterways
that might be in disequilibrium or
perhaps the continental chakras might
need realignment
next paragraph quote
for decades human activity including
unprecedented development has
contributed to compounding and
interrelated consequences escalating
energy use carbon emissions water use
deforestation and ocean acidification
don't only create climate change they
also have an impact on world populations
public health the availability of food
hygiene employment conditions education
poverty and gender inequality end quotes
just a matter on science in their own
terms i mean they've said there among
other things that ocean acidification
don't only create climate change blah
blah blah i thought that was the other
way around i thought climate change
caused the ocean acidification
isn't that the way things go you know
you increase the pollution and increases
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere the
rain comes down it's got an increased
amount of carbon dioxide in it so it
becomes carbonic acid and so
i think they've got the the cart before
the horse there it's they're saying
ocean acidification causes climate
change but i think it's the other way
around even in their own terms so they
can't even get that right apparently and
this is monash university pushing their
own particular doctrine here anyway all
of those things there that they listed
available your food hygiene employment
conditions etc have been improved and
all of them by the way by
escalating energy use and carbon
emissions
speaking of being in or out of balance
there is never any attempt to balance
the scales here this water use that
they've just complained about energy use
and carbon emissions is there any upside
do we ever hear about any upsides does
the calculation include any positive
impact of these things it's as if humans
are just out there willfully burning
seams of coal and burning forest down
letting all of the runoff go straight
into the ocean and for no good reason
i notice world population gets a mention
there but it's just that those things
that were listed have an impact on world
populations
but is it up or down and is going up or
going down
the bad thing they're having a bet both
ways it depends on which part of the
agenda you're pushing i suppose if you
want to emphasize the present
destruction humans are engaging in when
it comes to other species well just say
the planet is overpopulated with human
beings but if you want to scare the
kiddies into subscribing to your
ideology get them when they're young say
they're endangered or that populations
of people overseas are being threatened
as for the availability of food and
hygiene and all those things well i
don't know what they're getting at here
they've been improved without hardly any
backward steps for centuries
yet here is the implication and the
reading the pessimist takes away is all
those things are getting worse as if
sometime in the past it was better there
was better availability of public health
and food and hygiene employment
conditions education poverty
and gender equality what are they
talking about never have any of those
things been as good as they are now it
could be better still only if we did the
one thing that gave us accelerating
improvements in all of those things
namely accelerating progress fueled by
cheap energy and wealth creation another
paragraph quote
if we don't rethink and make changes we
will see more devastating bushfires
capon says we will see hotter longer and
more frequent heatwave events and other
extreme weather events like floods we'll
see more pandemics chemical pollutants
will increase in global food supply
chains end quote this has been said for
decades these are the prophecies they
have always made and have always turned
out refuted eventually especially when
they put a precise date on things it has
no effect when they make these
prophecies and they turn out false no
effect except for a doubling down now in
the sub stack article if you go to that
i've linked to another article
which lists
50 years worth of climate change
predictions published in newspapers over
the last 50 years that have turned out
completely and utterly false
it's titled wrong again 50 years of
failed eco-apocalyptic predictions
always precise with the dates and always
just around the corner now perhaps
modern doomsayers are wising up they're
not putting such precise dates on their
prophetic musings anymore so that way
they can get away with finger-wagging
without the possibility of ever being
falsified
but they can still purport to do science
can't they and they will and of course
we're going to see more pandemics as
that paragraph warned unless we can find
a solution to eliminating dangerous
viruses and bacteria it is another
vacuous assertion about what happens
with humans and viruses it is
catastrophizing
next paragraph quote
it's a grim picture
but kapon stresses that this shouldn't
mean that we stop all development in
fact he says development is fundamental
to the well-being of future generations
we should be striving for sustainable
development that is in harmony with
natural systems and doesn't impair
future opportunities
we can do a better kind of development
end quote
well we can't stop all development
how generous of him we can't stop it all
sustainable development though that's
what we need here we just need to invoke
that marvelous observation from david
deutsch in his chapter from the
beginning of infinity which is titled
unsustainable when someone passionate
about environmental activism invokes the
term sustainable it has this curiously
ambiguous meaning on the one hand it can
mean to provide something with what it
needs so in the case of humans to
provide people with what they need what
to what is required to sustain them to
keep them alive but what we need as
humans as a civilization is for things
to change and change rapidly because the
environment is changing rapidly and we
are changing rapidly as we learn more as
we create more knowledge and the
universe itself is in a constant state
of flux anyway the fundamental truth of
reality is things change and that means
if we want to adapt to the change if we
want to sustain ourselves we need to
change rapidly
so sustainable development must mean for
us rapid progress
the only development that is sustainable
in the long run is cheap efficient and
rapid and i would also say free and
open-ended and multi-pronged so we can
test many different ideas and approaches
simultaneously rather than having one
approach centralized for any given issue
but sustain also means
keep things the same and so sustainable
development what they mean what the
people who push these ideas mean by that
is actually slow
and barely changing not changing much so
that we don't damage or impact other
things
but that is a disastrous plan that is a
plan for catastrophe because there is an
impact coming from a place we do not
know the problem not looked for or found
in time unseen until on a quiet tuesday
afternoon bam
another tsunami or bam an asteroid or
virus or earthquake or nuclear disaster
or terrorist event or more frightening
still a thing no one thought could be an
existential threat it will make all
these other things pale into
insignificance and the only way
the only way we can be resilient in the
face of such a thing is to have
rapid progress rapid development not
wishy-washy hand-wringing precautionary
principles slowed down progress that is
parochially concerned either about one's
local or global environment we need a
cosmic perspective on these things
because our home is the universe and we
need to be ready for it and we can be if
we build wealth and progress much faster
all right i'm skipping
sections of the article now and i'll
just pick it up where it says quote the
climate crisis will have impacts on
health risks and access to health care
further promoting inequality across
population groups in addition in high
income countries in particular the
relatively rich lifestyles led by
current and past generations will
compound health concerns for future
generations at a cellular level and
here's a quote from an academic at
monash university quote
we've had access to high calorie dense
food too much of it setting up the
potential for transgenerational disease
high fat high sugar diets are becoming
more prevalent around the world and
these not only cause chronic diseases
such as diabetes and obesity but by
influencing our reproductive germ cells
and fetal growth in utero can contribute
to metabolic disease and offspring also
linked to our modern lifestyle health
risks arising from autoimmunity and
inflammation are more prevalent in the
population than ever before end quote
well yes um this is the the same idea
that the cancer seems to go up you know
what if you live longer eventually
something eventually goes wrong this
doesn't need to be the case but
there is the reason why certain diseases
become more prevalent people live longer
yeah if we reduce the lifespan of people
back to what it was centuries or
millennia ago you probably wouldn't be
finding diabetes and obesity people
would die before people ever became fat
or diabetic
no solution creates an unproblematic
state
these are better problems than people
dying at a much younger age as for the
inequality stuff they're talking about
there well it is necessary it is
necessary in a free society that there
is inequality across population groups
when it comes to health care and
everything else here is why a new
treatment or medical procedure has to be
invented it has to be created someone
has to come up with that idea and they
need to be paid to do it this invention
the creation it costs money because
scientists need to conduct research to
discover that it works and how it works
and so on and so forth and how to
actually manufacture the thing in order
to pay for all of that and those
scientists the first people to get the
treatment are going to pay a premium
they're going to pay a higher price and
that higher price
goes into funding more research and
causing the treatment to scale so that
for everyone else it's much cheaper it
might take a couple of years but hey
that works pretty well and it has worked
for the last few centuries it's the same
way that new mobile phones are the most
expensive should this be unexpected rich
people buy them rich people buy the best
technology when it first comes out and
this goes into funding the next round of
improvements making that mobile phone
ever cheaper the only alternative to
this that we know about is to take away
the freedom and the incentive to create
and the freedom to be motivated to some
extent by profit as well and to give
everyone exactly the same thing which is
what north korea does so one kind of
government made mobile phone one kind of
government treatment uniform for
everyone with exceedingly slow progress
and only at a rate the government
authorities deem is safe or valid also
why these planetary health officials are
interested in our diet i don't know but
isn't that wonderful they'll be able to
tell us what to eat and drink the
implication here is that perhaps
planetary health authorities might be up
to rubber stamping what's safe to eat
and no longer safe to eat who wouldn't
want to go to monash university and be
trained in planetary health sciences you
could be an authority on climate
medicine nutrition all the good stuff
just about every aspect of a person's
life you can be a guardian not only of
people alive today but have
intergenerational impact
next paragraph
quote
with issues as complex as these
potential solutions must bring together
experts from many fields in a world
divided into silos of expertise carol
says
monash university's strategic plan is to
bring the expert minds together and
solve these complex issues by going to
the source of the problem to tackle it
from a holistic multi-dimensional
perspective
end quote
holistic and multi-dimensional
holistic i've heard in alternative
health
arenas before multi-dimensional is uh
it's starting to sound a little bit um
multiversal there but
anyway in the same way that if you've
fallen off your bike and broken your leg
it's not necessarily the case you need
an orthopedic surgeon hey to repair your
broken femur no you want the holistic
medical team taking time to fully assess
everything from a multi-dimensional
perspective to prevent future falls off
your bike we just need to check your
eyes and ears and perhaps prescribe a
less high-calorie diet rich in soft
drinks because i think you've been
unbalanced because of carrying that
additional weight from your chronic
obesity
moving on quote
there will also be many future voices
with important contributions to make
when young people in the generation that
will come after them stare down an
uncertain future they do so with insight
and fearlessness
get out of their way says this academic
give them more power to talk about their
futures discuss the big issues and have
input into policy formation
the faster and more cohesively we act he
says the greater chance we give our
children and our children's children to
thrive in a changing world kapon takes
an optimistic message from covert 19.
the pandemic has shown us that we can
act urgently he says we can come
together and act together as a society
with a purpose
now it's time
we take that further
end quote
well yes get out of the way of young
people get out of the way at least if
they agree with all of that with all of
that doctrine
the actual optimistic young person who
wants to go against the grain here and
argue for an actually optimistic future
where we do not need to control
our fellows for fears they're vectors of
disease or sources of pollutants
contributing to the catastrophic global
climate change
how far out of the way will an academic
get to make space for a place on the
podiums of the universities for the
young person who will say that we need
more people and need to encourage young
profit-driven creative entrepreneurs who
want to work for a deregulated society
where we can take risks experimenting
with scientific and medical technology
without government interference to
produce more widgets more cheaply what
about the genuine optimist who takes
from the pandemic not the message that
we can come together and act as a
society with purpose and that we could
take this further but rather that we can
foster individuality and respect and
honour those who disagree with the
mainstream and who see another way of
improving society and the planet not
through sustainable development but
rather by recognizing that nothing is
sustainable except for rapid progress
and if the progress we have is too slow
slowed down by concerns about
sustainability and the environment then
we will be overtaken ultimately by the
very environment we are seeking to
preserve in some sort of present idyllic
form
we
are the most valuable entities known in
the universe the environment is little
more than our resource for us to
construct the world around us if we lose
sight of this and instead come to all
believe and all think of us ourselves
human beings as the danger and the
environment in need of protection from
us rather than the other way around then
really everything will be lost
for now that doctrine of protect the
environment for we humans are dangerous
well it's just the most prominent
academic dogma and it's got a foothold
in the institutions and it's got a
foothold in the media but it has not yet
caused dramatic change in the way
industry business and the average person
on the face of the planet behaves but
it's having some effect for now at least
implicitly people do realize it's the
environment that's the danger and we
need protection from it we need
protection from natural disasters
viruses and bad ideas that motivate the
bad behavior of others and goodness
knows what else is just around the
corner that's going to be a danger to us
our impulse to survive and improve
still directs our behavior and still it
overcomes this pessimistic anti-humanism
that would seek to diminish and reverse
progress
but it will not necessarily remain this
way the universities might be lost to a
large extent on this point they might be
centers of furthering the indoctrination
of the young to continue this cycle of
despair and dismay but with any hope
there can be some new way forward here
outside the mainstream education system
where perhaps young people can learn
optimism and work on actual fundamental
progress hopefully
happily
generating wealth generating more
knowledge